---
title: Introduction
layout: post
comments: false
published: false
---

The PHP ecosystem offers a variety of solutions for the use of modern, 
flexible and powerful backend solutions. Slim is a very powerful and lightweight 
micro-framework that can be used to build APIs, websites and web applications.

Not always you need an all-encompassing framework like Symfony or Laravel. 
These are certainly great frameworks, but also very often over-dimensioned. 
Instead, Slim offers a relatively limited set of features that do what you really need.

The core tasks of Slim includes HTTP request routing and dispatching. 
FastRoute parses the HTTP routes and forwards them to the specific action handlers. 
The routes are defined directly in PHP and not in YAML files, as you know it from 
other popular frameworks. The use of the native programming language has several advantages. 
On the one hand, action handlers can be implemented directly as closures (anonymous functions), 
on the other hand, IDE's and various tools offer many possibilities for writing, 
auto-completing and checking PHP code. By avoiding YAML, further, relatively 
time-consuming parser operations and dependencies on other components are eliminated. 
Thanks to PHP's internal OP-Cache, PHP files can be fetched even faster and directly from 
memory without having to access the server's hard disk again.

Slim 4 is a solid foundation for the seamless integration of additional PHP components. 
Due to the new modular system of Slim 4, developers are even more free in the choice 
of their components. The updating of components can be done in faster iterations. 
This eliminates the business and technical risks of upgrading and refactoring the entire 
application using a classic framework. However, should it happen that a specific component 
is no longer being developed, only this specific component needs to be replaced and 
the system can continue to work. In a modern and increasingly agile environment, 
the mentioned factors from above can play an important role for every running business.

The base for flexible and long-lasting architectures are standardized interfaces 
specified by the PHP-FIG (PHP Framework Interop Group). Accordingly, in Slim 4 the 
container implementation (formerly Pimple) was completely decoupled and replaced by 
the generic PSR-11 container interface. Within the Slim community PHP-DI has become 
the most popular container implementation relatively quickly. PHP-DI simplifies the 
configuration of container definitions to a minimum and automates the injection of 
dependencies via constructor injection (autowiring). PHP-DI is very well documented 
and has a relatively large and helpful community behind it. Especially for the integration 
in Slim a lot of useful information and examples are provided. 

### HTTP Messages

HTTP messages (request and response) are the fundamental elements of web development. 
Before you can go live with Slim, you must choose a PSR-7 (HTTP Messages) implementation 
that best suits you for your application. Slim automatically detects the 
installed PSR-7 components and saves you from manually creating a ServerRequest object. 
You can choose between the in-house Slim PSR-7 component (slim/psr7) and external 
components such as Nyholm (nyholm/psr7, nyholm/psr7-server), Guzzle (guzzlehttp/psr7) 
and Laminas-Diactoros (laminas/laminas-diactoros).

Developers who are looking for a very lightweight, strict and high-performance 
component will certainly make a good choice with Nyholm PSR-7 and Nyholm PSR-7 Server. 
Please note that for compatibility reasons, both Nyholm components should always 
be installed together.

In case you want to migrate from Slim 3 to Slim 4, or if you prefer to use Slim alltogether, 
I would recommend to install the [slim/psr7](https://github.com/slimphp/Slim-Psr7) component.

### Middleware

By using middleware, you can execute code before and after your Slim application to 
manipulate the request and response objects as needed. This is useful, for example, 
if you authenticate the request before executing your application or if you want to 
send the required CORS headers back to the client in a response.

Different frameworks use middleware differently. Slim adds middleware as concentric 
layers that encircles your core application. Each new middleware layer encircles all 
existing middleware layers. The concentric structure expands outward as more middleware 
layers are added.

The most recently added middleware is the first to be executed. This so-called 
Last In - First Out (LIFO) principle has not changed for compatibility reasons with Slim 3.

Since Slim 4 the middleware concept is based on the PSR-15 (HTTP Server Request Handler) 
interfaces. The PSR-15 interfaces are based on the PSR-7 request and response interfaces. 
While the entire middleware is subordinated to the PSR-15 interface, your action handlers 
remain unaffected.

### Bootstrapping

The bootstrap process is basically the initial program and starts immediately 
with the execution of the request. The goal of the bootstrap process is to create 
a fully configured Slim App instance. To make sure that all classes can be 
found automatically, the Composer autoloader is loaded in the first step. 

After that a container instance (e.g. PHP-DI) should be created and configured. 
Since Slim 4 the AppFactory class is available for creating the Slim App instance.
The AppFactory was introduced to reduce some of the problems caused by decoupling 
the PSR-7 implementation from the core of the Slim App. The new Factory detects 
which PSR-7 implementation is installed in your project and allows you to 
instantiate an application using `AppFactory::create()`.

When the `App::run()` method is executed, Slim passes through the middleware 
stack and then sends the resulting response object to the HTTP client. 
In the next listing you will find a minimal example application with PHP-DI
as container implementation.

```php
<?php

use DI\ContainerBuilder;
use Slim\Factory\AppFactory;

require_once __DIR__ . '/../vendor/autoload.php';

// Build PHP-DI Container instance
$containerBuilder = new ContainerBuilder();
$containerBuilder->addDefinitions(__DIR__ . '/../config/container.php');
AppFactory::setContainer($containerBuilder->build());

// Create App instance
$app = AppFactory::create();

// Register routes
$app->get('/', \App\Action\Home\HomeAction::class)->setName('root');
$app->get('/users/{id}', \App\Action\User\UserGetAction::class);
$app->get('/users', \App\Action\User\UserListAction::class);
$app->post('/users', \App\Action\User\UserCreateAction::class);

// Register middleware
$app->addRoutingMiddleware();

// Start
$app->run();
```

### Action Handler

After the request has passed through the incoming middleware stack, 
Slim forwards the HTTP request to an action handler, if a corresponding route with 
handler is defined for it. Since the release of Slim 4 there has been a kind of 
rethinking in the area of routing. In the past, more and more closures (anonymous functions) 
were used to implement the handling of requests and responses. 

However, this very pragmatic approach scales not very well in combination 
with Dependency Injection and the [Container interface](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-11/) (PSR-11). 
It turned out that  with increasing number of routes more and more unnecessary closures 
have to be loaded, although usually only one action handler per request is needed for execution. 
Furthermore it is cumbersome to provide local variables via the "use" statement within 
the closure scope. For this reason I recommend developers to use so-called 
"single action controllers". While traditional controllers (known from MVC) usually 
provide several action methods, a single action controller offers only one action 
method per class. On the one hand, the concept (Action-Domain-Responder) automatically 
leads to more classes, on the other hand it ensures that each action class is 
responsible for only one single task (Single-responsibility principle, SOLID). 

Each action class declares its dependencies in the constructor. 
The Dependency-Injection Container (e.g. PHP-DI) therefore only has to create and 
inject the objects that are actually needed. To enable the Slim dispatcher to call 
the action class like a function, only add the magic method `__invoke` and the fully 
qualified class name as action handler in the route definitions. 

By using fully qualified class names you also help your IDE and static code analysis 
to better understand and analyze the code.

Routing definition example:

```php
$app->get('/ ', \App\Action\HomeAction::class);
$app->get('/users ', \App\Action\UserListAction::class);
$app->post('/users ', \App\Action\UserCreateAction::class);
```

### Configuration

Slim itself does not specify how to configure the application.

However, it's common practice that all configuration files are kept within the 
`config/` directory as PHP files. For example, in the file `config/settings.php` 
you first load all default settings into an array.
 
You will also need to inject environment-specific information. 
API keys are one such piece of information, as you generally 
don’t want to use your production payment gateway key in a throw-away 
test environment where you’re running integration tests.
This environment-specific configuration files can be stored in a special file, 
e.g. `config/production.php`, that will "overwrite" the default settings.

Another aspect is secrets management. API keys, passwords, and other secret 
or semi-secret data needs to be kept separate from your code. 
Committing keys to a repository is a sadly common security mistake, 
and you want to be able to avoid that. For this purpose all secret information should be
loaded from another configuration file like `env.php` or a `.env`. Make sure
to exclude this sensitive files from your version control by adding an 
entry to your `.gitignore` file.

### Databases

A typical API or web application of course includes a database. 
However, Slim does not provide an abstraction layer for databases and leaves 
this decision completely up to the developers. On the other hand, practically 
all database components that the PHP universe has to offer are available. 

Besides the classic PDO, other QueryBuilders and ORM's can be installed using Composer. 
In the area of relational databases, components such as: Eloquent (Laravel), Doctrine, 
Laminas/Db and the CakePHP Query Builder are frequently used. Of course, abstractions 
for NoSQL databases can also be installed and combined as needed. 

Slim doesn't limit the developers in their choice of components. 
Since Slim 4 is still relatively new, there is really few information about databases 
on the official website. 
For this reason I provide several tutorials in this eBook that cover this topic in detail. 

Usually you start with the evaluation of a proper database component and install 
it with Composer within the Slim project. Then you create a container definition so 
that the corresponding database object can be passed automatically via constructor injection. 
The configuration of the individual database connections should be loaded dynamically 
from the specific configuration files depending on the server environment.

In general, it is recommended to abstract all the database functionality (queries) 
in repository classes. You should make sure that the business logic and database 
access is separated from each other tp prevent mixing of these different concerns (responsibilities).

### Database migrations

Migrations are some kind of a version control for your database. They allow a team to modify 
the database schema and keep the current schema status up to date. 

Migrations are usually done with [Phinx](https://phinx.org/). 
For updating the database schema, Phinx supports migrations written in PHP and in SQL. 
Phinx can be installed relatively quickly in a Slim application. 
I made the experience that a PHP configuration file (`phinx.php`) is better suited for 
integration than a YAML configuration file (`phinx.yml`). One of the reasons for this is 
that within the PHP file you get the PDO object from the Dependency Injection Container
and then pass it to Phinx as database connection parameter.

### Architecture

Slim is perfectly suited for almost any kind of modern web architecture. 
In practice, I have found that the [ADR](https://github.com/pmjones/adr#action-domain-responder) 
(Action Domain Responder) pattern in combination with the 
[hexagonal architecture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hexagonal_architecture_(software)) 
works very well for complex applications. ADR is a web-specific alternative to Model-View-Controller Model 2. 
The developers are of course free to choose the architecture style they want to use.

### Frontent Views

For rendering Twig templates, the Slim framework provides a separate 
[Twig-View](https://github.com/slimphp/Twig-View) component. 
The Twig-View component is based on the well-known [Twig](https://twig.symfony.com/) 
Template Engine and can be seamlessly integrated into your Slim project. It is installed
via Composer and the `TwigMiddleware` is added to your middleware stack. 
The `TwigMiddlware` registers a Twig RuntimeLoader and a TwigExtension to provide 
additional help functions such as `url_for()`.

For the fans of native PHP templates, the Slim framework offers the so-called 
[PHP-View](https://github.com/slimphp/PHP-View) component.
This engine renders PHP templates into a PSR-7 compatible response object and works well 
in combination with Slim 4, but please note that PHP-View has no built-in protection 
against XSS attacks. 
It is the responsibility of the developer to use special components like laminas-escaper.

Slim is not only useful as a backend for a [Single-page application](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single-page_application) (SPA), 
it can also be used to provide an SPA itself. For this purpose, the required front-end 
framework components can be installed using Webpack and loaded using the Twig Webpack extension 
[fullpipe/twig-webpack-extension](https://github.com/fullpipe/twig-webpack-extension).
This eBook contains a dedicated article about this topic.

### Security

Already on file system level you can do a lot for the security of a web application. 
For example, it's common practice that the web accessible content is strictly separated from 
the internal application. The public assets are usually made available in the `public/`
directory and should be set up on the productive web server as the document-root directory. 
Separating the `public/` directory ensures that unauthorized users cannot access internal 
folders like `config/` or `vendor/`. 

The standard PHP package skeleton ([pds/skeleton](https://github.com/php-pds/skeleton))
defines directory names at project root level and is ideal as a basic structure 
for Slim applications and custom components. 

For authentication, external components can be installed as needed. 
Typically, you install the component you need and add it to the stack using an 
existing or a custom middleware. This ensures that all HTTP requests can be checked 
equally and rejected if necessary.

Already on file system level you can do a lot for the security of a web application. 
For example, it is common that the Web accessible content is strictly separated 
from the internal application. The public part is usually made available in the 
`public/` directory and should be set up on the productive web server as 
the document-root directory. Separating the `public/` directory ensures 
that unauthorized users cannot access internal folders like `config/` or `vendor/`. 

The [slim/csrf](https://github.com/slimphp/Slim-Csrf) component provides a CSRF middleware 
that protects Slim applications against all potentially unsafe HTTP requests (POST, PUT, DELETE, PATCH). 
[CORS preflight requests](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Preflight_request)
can be defined and processed directly in the routings of Slim, without the need for additional tools. 

For API's with JSON Web Tokens (JWT) you can find an exclusive article in this eBook.

### Testing

PHPUnit is the industry standard for unit and integration testing in PHP. 
The official [Slim 4 Skeleton](https://github.com/slimphp/Slim-Skeleton/tree/master/tests)
and the [odan/slim4-skeleton](https://github.com/odan/slim4-skeleton/tree/master/tests)
show you examples of how action handlers (HTTP) and application services can be 
tested very easily. The installation if PHPUnit is optional but highly recommended.

In contrast to popular frameworks that offer a wide range of functions for testing, 
Slim requires more customized solutions for testing. 

For HTTP tests you can create a server-side request object (PSR-7) manually 
or you can use the Slim `RequestFactory::createRequest()` method. 
Afterwards the action is executed by the `App::handler($request)` method and a 
response object is returned. Finally, the expected result can be checked 
using the typical PHPUnit `assert*()` methods. 

For complete integration tests, which also includes the database, 
it would be possible to mock the repository methods. But this has the 
disadvantage that the repository code is not completely covered and 
thus remains untested in the end.

The useful PHPUnit [DbUnit](https://github.com/sebastianbergmann/dbunit) extension 
is not maintained anymore. So there is no other choice than to implement a trait for database testing yourself. 
How to perform tests with a database using Slim can be found in this
[Slim 4 Skeleton](https://github.com/odan/slim4-skeleton) project.

### Deployment

The build and deployment process should be automated as much as possible.
Composer and other tools such as Git don't have to be installed on the web server 
if you automate your build process using tools such as [Apache Ant](https://ant.apache.org/) 
or [Phing](https://www.phing.info/). 

The build process creates a distributable file a.k.a "deployment artifact" that is 
free of unnecessary ballast and generates a performance-optimized Composer autoloader. 
Depending on the level of automation of your deployment process 
(continuous delivery or continuous deployment), 
custom scripts or tools like [Deployer](https://deployer.org/) can make the 
deployment process more efficient and reliable.

### Support

The [documentation for Slim 4](https://www.slimframework.com/docs/v4/) is a
good reference for later. But I think, especially beginners, 
have a hard time seeing the "big picture". This why I wrote this eBook. 

The Slim community is happy to help with general questions and offers a 
[Slim-Forum](https://discourse.slimframework.com/).

You can chat with other Slim Framework developers to share code or troubleshoot 
tricky issues using the  [Slim slack channel](https://www.slimframework.com/#community).

### Conclusion

Slim offers a stable foundation for long-lasting API's and web applications. 
Standardized interfaces ensure a high degree of compatibility and flexibility in the 
selection and interchangeability of components. 

The high degree of freedom contrasts with a high degree of responsibility 
and security aspects. For developers who expect a all-in-one solution 
like Laravel or Symfony, it must be said that their expectations cannot 
be met with a Micro-framework like Slim 4 for conceptual reasons. 

Before starting with Slim, it is essential to know the 
basics such as the [Composer Autoloader](https://getcomposer.org/doc/04-schema.md#psr-4) (PSR-4), 
Middleware ([PSR-15](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-15/)) and the "immutable" 
HTTP interfaces ([PSR-7](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-7/)). 

Based on existing Slim-Skeleton projects, it is possible to implement versatile and
customized solutions.

And now, let's go! :-)
